Here we shall discuss clocked SR flip flop.
We know that a cell is having the full form
that is set. It is SR flip flop.So now we
can draw is a flip-flop circuit using and
logic at the clock and the nor logic will
be used or the nor Gates will be used at the
flip flop region. And otherwise, you can have
the NAND gates both that the clock control
input and also for the flip flop region, so
this is my AND and Nor flip flop circuit SR flip
flop, and this is our nand nand clocked
SR flip flop circuit. So now let me discuss
them one by one.So here is the respective
truth table for this clock SR Flip-flop. There
is a truth table for this clocked SF flip
flop now, we are having three inputs that
is S and R and the previous output. So considering
all these three that means eight combinations.
We're having the respective next output of
the circuit. So let us explain some of them.
So let us suppose. We are considering this
one arbitrarily up taken this so s is equal
to 0 and R is equal to 1 and output will be
1 in that case. So I'm going for S is equal
to 0 R is equal to 1 and output will be 1
for this case. So here it is 1 so obviously
here it will be 0 so that is the initial case
S 0 R 1 and output is 1 so Mark the inputs
and outputs accordingly. So when the clock will be high. So here it is going to
get 1 because 1 and 1 is 1 and 1 and 0 is
0 here. So now you can find that here. We
are having this one. So if one of the inputs
is one. And for a or gate then output will
be 1 but here it is nor gate so output will
be 0 in that case. So it will be 0 so 0 will
come down here. So 0 or 0 is 0 not of that
one. So Q will have the new output 1 so new
output 0 so Q will have the new output zero
so it has been explained. So let us apply
the same logic here. Also here is is equal
to 0 R is equal to 1 and here this Q is equal
to 1 here. So Q is equal to 1 here. So as
Q is equal to 1 so Q bar will be 0 so when
we shall make this clock pulse High then 1 and 1 is 1 not of that 0 because here it is
nand gate and 1 and 0 is 0 not of that that
is one here. So in case of nand gate if one
of the inputs is zero, then nand gate will
produce the output one. So it will produce
output one that one will come down here. So
1 and 1 is 1 not of that will be getting 0 here.
So the next output will be 0 and that has
been explained in this way. We can test other
inputs also for the verification that these
two table is applicable for both the circuits
now one thing is very important. You can find
that here. We are having this nand gate clock
logic is also having nand Gates. And here
are is having opposite is Q Bar here. We are
having nor gates at the flip flop level and here
we are having this respective and gate for
the clock control and here you can find that
R is having Q at front. So in the same line,
we're having R and Q in the same line. We're
having R and Q bar and that's why this too.
Two circuits will have the same generic truth
table for it. You can go on testing other
inputs and for the respective value of Q.
You can consider any row will be getting the
required output as well. So now let me tell
you why this one one is becoming indeterministic
or indeterminate. So I'm just considering
this circuit here. So making this one one
here and I'm considering this one say so one
one making this one zero so Q is zero, so
But it'll be one in that case. Okay, so one
one will be applicable to S and R and Q is
equal to 0 there. So Q bar will be 1 so when
this clock pulse will be high. So one will
be coming down and one will be coming down.
So what will happen you can find this one
that if this particular one is there so nor
will produce output zero and as one is there
so nor will produce output 0 so both the outputs
are having value 0 here. So that is not in
deterministic.that is Also deterministic now the
thing will happen when the clock pulse will
become low when the clock pulse will become
low then it will produce zero as output and
they will produce zero as output so what is
happening at this very instant of time the
inputs are 0 and 0 and here we are having
this output zero and zero. So here we will
be having two case studies if we consider
let us suppose case study number one and case
study number two in the case study number
one if I Consider this Q at first if I consider
this Q at first, so this 0 will be coming
down here. So 0 or 0 is 0 not of that one
will be there. And this one will be going
there. So 1 or 0 is 1 not of that 0 will be
going here. So here we consider Q at first
now in case of our case study to if we consider
Q Bar here then here we are having 0 so 0
or 0 is 1 0 or 0 is 0 not of that one. And
this one will be coming down So 1 or 0 is
0 1 or 0 is 1 and not of that zero will be
going here. So here we have considered the
Q bar at first so you can find that.
So now when this clock will become 0 will
be low in that case. We may have 0 1 or 1
0 any kind of output combinations at Q
and Q bar and that is not deterministic that
will depend upon the the delay time. Which
is required to have the output of application
of the input of this to NOR gate so that's
why the problem is becoming in deterministic
non-deterministic in that case and also this
this particular condition is known as race
condition. So that means this inputs will
be racing through the gate to produce the
required output and that is totally in deterministic
because here we don't know which is working
faster than which working slower. So that
will depend upon the delay time of these two
nor Gates. So that's why it is called indeterministic
or race condition. Okay, so we have explained
all this some of you can also test at your
end. So now let us make one summary out of
that. So here we are going for this summary
and this is known as characteristic table.
So for 0 0 and for 0 0 input and finding this
one that previous output is getting maintained.
So here it is Q(t) for 0 1 and finding always
output will be zero.for 1 0 and finding that
all is this output is 1 are for 1 1 and finding
indeterminate condition. So this is known
as race condition. This is known as reset
This is known as set and this is known as no change.
So it is very easy to remember in this way
when the set is enabled enabled means one
and set is not enabled output will be reset
always remember reset or clear means zero
preset or set means one. So whenever set is
being say is enabled then output is getting
set when neither one of them is enabled output
will not change and when both of them will
be enabled then race condition will take place.
So now we are going to do this one. This is
known as there is known as the excitation
table. Here we are having this outputs and
depending on that. We shall find out the inputs.
Now see 0 to 0 transition here. We are getting
two cases 0 to 0 transition. We are getting
two cases. So for the inputs are 0 0 and 0
1 so s is 0 permanent and R can be 0 or 1
anything so you should be going for 0 X . To
present this to merging the 0 0 and 0 1 combination.
I can write 0 X X stands for don't care condition.
So now we require this 0 1 so 0 1 I'm finding
I'm getting only here. 0 1 I'm getting only
here 0 1 so required input will be 1 0. Required
input will be 1 0 I've just got it from here
1 0 so this combination am getting here. I
want you to combination. I'm getting here
so input should be 0 1. Here for 1 1. I'm
getting 1 1 condition here. That
is 1 to 1 transition input should be 0 0 1
to 1 transition input should be 1 0 so 0 0
and 1 0 if we summarize it is x 0 so this is
about excitation table. So now let us find
out the characteristic equation of this to
table of this SR flip flop So let me plot
this Q(t+1) here So here we are having all
possible combinations in the sequence.So 0
1 0 0 so 0 1 0 0 and this is my 1 1 and indeterminate
indeterminate. So 1 1  indeterminate.
So in this way, I have done the marking on
this respective karnaugh map three variable
karnaugh map. So now let me go for the covering.
So this is a cover so you can write this one
as so now this particular cover can also be
get extended up to this. So if we consider
them, I'm getting this one as s so here from
this kind of map.You can easily find out that
our bar Q(t) that is for this one our Q(t)
bar And for this one I can also extend it
because normal conditions can be treated also
as ones so little to go for this one, but
it is better to go for this and then s will
be the covered the respective output here
so R bar Q(t+1) is known as the characteristic
equation of this flip flop These are the circuits
with and nor logic and with nand nand logic.
This is our respective characteristic table.This
is our respective our excitation table and
this characteristic equation of this Sr flip-flop.
But SR flip flop has remaining one problem
that is a race condition. So in the next people
If that is our D flip-flop, we shall solve
this problem.